The cards will be wonderful.
Excellent.
Thank you.
This is Paul Hackett.
Paul.
Nick Brasbane.
Pleasure to meet you.
Nice to meet you.
Tell me, Gene, where we are.
What is this place?
This place is called Himalayan Indian Resources.
It's a project of the Trace Foundation.
I was in the U.S.
government service working for the Library of Congress.
Chiefly, first in India, then in Indonesia, then in Egypt.
And the purpose was to... Can you give me the years that you did this?
19... I started in 1968.
I worked for the Library of Congress.
I worked through... I just retired in 94.
Or 97, sorry.
Okay.
While I was in India...
we had access to the public law, the authority rupees, and one of the projects was to produce Tibetan books in various formats, because the refugees had just started to come out from China, and there had been a lot of damage at that time and during the Cultural Revolution.
So what we did... They were carrying books with them?
Yes.
And so we tried to... Print.
Everything that...
that we could find.
Were they books from repositories, or were they some personal and private family collections?
Personal.
No, they just seized what they could.
We tried to reconstruct the literature.
Was this a formal project, or was it... Well, I was trying to... Well, it was a project on my own.
And you were based where, when this was going on?
In Delhi.
So you were doing this in Delhi?
Yeah.
Excellent.
That's a reference.
Thank you.
I was working in the library in Dharamsala.
Uh-huh.
We've been friends how many years?
30 years.
Yeah.
Taki, how do you pronounce your last name?
T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-T-
And the idea was that they would then make copies available to the West, but they would also try to preserve their literature for themselves.
That was not so successful.
Right?
Which one?
All of it?
All of the above or the latter?
Well, you know, we certainly got a lot of books here, but many of them were printed in a very short number of copies and were not really distributed as widely as they should have been in the Tibetan community.
This is, for example...
A scholar who lived from the 13th to 1451 decided to put together all of knowledge.
And his name?
It was Bodong Chole Namgau.
Is there something that we could spell or get a xerox of a title page or something?
Yes, yes.
Encyclopedia Tibetica, the collective works.
And so he put together whatever he thought was worth knowing.
now that's what you say and uh into a compendium of uh existence that's a compendium of what of uh deny of existence how would you translate deny existence existence existence right existence of everything a compendium of existence yeah the putting together of
all of uh phenomenons yeah existence phenomena existence phenomena in the world or in today no no in terms of what there was at a platonic level what there was worth worthy of knowledge and this was one of the bigger projects how many volumes i see there's a hundred and i don't know thirty seven
And these were published where?
In New Delhi.
These were published in New Delhi?
By Tibet House.
From material that was brought out?
By refugees.
Really?
These came from a monastery.
Many of the volumes were lost.
So it's not complete, but it's all that survives of this collection.
Wow.
You don't think that there's a mirror copy in Tibet?
Unlikely.
They want to come here, and now they're coming here to make copies.
So is this stuff being systematically destroyed, do you think, in Tibet?
Well, yes.
During the Cultural Revolution, it was really very bad.
Now what's happening is it's the tourists who are destroying things.
For example, here are things you can buy around the bar corps.
Around the where?
Around the central cathedral of Lhasa.
These are blocks.
for printing books.
They're woodblocks?
Yes.
And this is, uh, this is now impossible to print anymore from because somebody bought us a page of it.
I mean, who's going to carve that again?
This is circa what, would you say?
Uh, this we know was carved in about, probably, it's the D.C.
somewhere.
1680s.
This is over 300 years old.
And what do you call it?
What is the formal name for it again?
Is there a name for it?
A woodblock.
A woodblock from which text would be printed, right?
Yeah.
They sell them for souvenirs in China.
They just break up the entire thing and break up the whole library.
And where were they from?
They were kept in libraries?
Yeah, they were kept in monasteries.
Monastic presses?
Yeah.
And you would go in there and there would just be whole rooms, just walls.
of nothing but these blocks, and they still print off of similar blocks in South Indian.
I wouldn't mind getting a few photographs or something.
We'll do it, yes.
And you know, the whole lot is needed.
If they weren't birthed during the Cultural Revolution, like I said, they're sold as souvenirs.
I'll just give you the name again for the tape recorder.
Who's your name?
My name is Paul Hackett.
H-A-C-K-E-T-T.
Fortunately, we know
the book it's from, and we had published the book, the page.
What's the page number on that?
It's page... So this is a page.
It's a long... It's about three inches wide by perhaps a... It's hard to tell.
Right here.
Careful.
Gene, do you mind if I take a few photographs while I'm here?
I can't quite make it out.
Oh, I just got the lung on that.
You have to print it in reverse, right?
He made an impression in his thumb.
What is it?
Say that again?
This book, which book can never be printed again?
This one.
Like this.
So how many blocks of these were going on these?
Here you go.
Here's the page.
Oh, come on.
Here you go.
Don't go away.
and this was this block that's the page that's the page it was it was how did you find that so well there's the patient on the block these were amazing yeah now it's the only hat uh so to get the picture right
You'd have to have both, you'd have to have the block be proceeding as they make it an EU.
This is what's tragic about it.
What happens is extraordinarily tragic.
And this is from which book?
Is this the same book, the same cyclopedia that we were talking about?
No, no.
This book is called The White Barrel.
The White Barrel, it translates to White Barrel.
Right.
So if I give you a card book, it's 20 minutes.
so you know because we have this but you notice look at what's happening this book since 1972 it's already
have the way to the destruction.
Because the paper is highly acidic.
South India?
South India.
Badly produced.
I can show you much worse.
How would you describe the content of what we would have here?
We also have the book.
Anyway, how do we describe the what?
How would you describe the content of this?
This is used by the region of Tibet, and it's a standardized system of calculations of time, calendar, astrology, and this is very important.
And that's when these blocks were produced.
How many of these blocks do you have here?
We just have two.
How did you get them?
I bought one as a young curator.
I was so sad to see them.
Everybody was buying it all around the Barcourt.
The Barcourt is... How do you spell Barcourt?
B-A-R-A-R-O-R.
That's the pilgrimage route surrounding the Potala Palace.
No, the Great Cathedral Plaza.
And it just made me very sad and thought, well, we were having a visit from some Chinese delegates.
I thought, well, maybe I could help.
But, you know, they have no control of them because it's under one faction.
So have these monastic libraries been plundered for these things?
What's happened?
Nobody's taking care of them?
There's no curatorial staff there?
No, but the blocks, you see, were in the printing press.
And the printing press collapsed.
It's what's called the old printerie, a plaza, of the chur, and it collapsed.
So the blocks...
Many of them were broken.
And when did this happen, approximately?
Happened a few years ago.
You know, nobody was using them.
Many of them were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution.
This is horrible.
So the idea was, it was a stop-gas salvage operation, basically, to try to get them published in a form that they could be used.
by scholars, both Tibetan, Chinese, wherever we could use them, and Western.
So what we did was, the first idea was to print them in Western book form, because Tibetan books are loosely.
And if you get them in a library, and somebody puts them down in the chute, then you have to put them back together.
Let's take an interesting one.
Here's one unwrapped.
Okay.
So you just read them.
So for each page there were two blocks, the front side and the back side.
Is this something recently printed?
Yeah, this is recently printed.
Now is that floxing already that we see or is that just something, is this acidic paper do you think?
Oh yeah, it's all from India.
Acid free paper is not
So you can see it's already having, it's already deteriorating.
You can see the back side of it.
And so then these are like fastened together.
No, they're wrapped around in cloths with boards.
Here's an example of an original.
So the codex is not something that, this is not necessarily, we don't necessarily have a codex kind of a book, right?
This is... Now, you're unwrapping a book out of a yellow... What do you call this cloth?
Does it have a name?
It's called a payday or a book wrapper.
This is the first or the second known block print in the Tutaten work.
It dates from the last decade of the 13th century.
This copy here?
No, the blue box for printing it.
We don't know when it was printed, but it obviously is printed
quite early.
The blocks were carved at the time of the funeral rites of the Emperor Kublai Khan.
It was badly damaged, but it has the name
of the person who carved the blocks, and it was done for the... It says that it was done to fulfill the last thoughts, or requests, of the emperor, and to ensure the continuation of the realm of the queen and her children.
uh and to help and for the benefit of all sentient creatures it was the blocks were carved at the instance of he would know who he was he was uh somebody has made a little note giving his full name uh how would you how would you spell that for me so i don't have to wrestle with this u-r-g-y-a-n-t-a he was the uh the pake or he was i'm sorry the
The guru for this particular text, this is a Kala Chakra, the Wheel of Time text.
And he gave the emperor the teaching and in return the widow felt that it would be appropriate that the blocks would be carved.
This was carved in China.
at the Imperial Court.
Now, how do you know all of this about this particular book?
Well, you can read it from them.
But you learned this after you acquired this particular book?
No, I knew what it was.
We published it.
So you published it.
And how did you get this particular copy?
Well, this is a different copy than the one we published.
It was badly damaged, as you can see, and we've had it restored.
But is this a copy that more or less successfully escaped the Cultural Revolution?
Yes, but you see it's very badly damaged.
It was water damaged.
It was water damaged, and then it had to have to be fixed.
You see, it's great.
These are never bound in any kind of a traditional manner.
No, you see, if you have anything in the library, somebody can always feel a sheet, a relief.
So how do they protect against that?
Do we have chained libraries?
Oh, no.
We have gay, wrathful librarians.
Who wouldn't collaborate.
Who was allowed to read these?
Great llamas, like Duc Chin Chin.
I wouldn't have been allowed to touch them.
There's a lot of people in here.
Now, what are the people who are here?
These are from the Chase Party, most of them.
Marty is head of his organization, or the vice chairman, what do you call him?
Vice chairman?
Vice president.
Vice president of NITARTA.
Now, this is what we did with printed books.
It was the first stage in a salvation operation.
Do you have a general number of how many printed books you might have been able to do this with?
How many did we do it with?
I can't remember.
The PL480 collection?
About 5,000.
5,000 titles?
5,000 volumes.
About 80,000, 100,000 individual texts.
For example, here, these are the collected works.
of about 12 volumes but each volume could contain 20 30 40 50 texts and they were all just put together now you're printing these in a traditional codex form
But you see, Tibetans don't like this.
They like what you showed me.
He wouldn't like to read that.
Because here, for example, here's the front page, here's the back page.
And this is almost like reading a newspaper and microfilm to us.
Now, the next stage of the operation is the electronic.
Okay, and that's what you're getting into now.
And that's what Rinpoche and many of his associates are trying to do, is to input the text into machine-readable form, and then they can make copies on demand.
These books here, are they here for the purpose of...
being seated someplace to be to be placed someplace or is this a repository here it's repository you know for a while see if we know what we're testing it out but the idea is that uh for example which has come here today he's uh we i haven't met him for how many years since he was a young young monk how many years ago was that maybe in the 70s and where are you based now
Mostly in Canada.
But what he's doing now is a continuation, a logical continuation of this, through the electronic format.
But he's come here today.
He's found texts that are not accessible to him.
And how long have you been doing this electronic format?
Since 92.
How important is what these people have done to your effort?
Oh, it's very valuable.
It's beyond the limit of benefit.
Beyond limit.
Because we have Gene's effort of having it being published.
Using U.S.
government excess
agricultural commodities pre-o-480 yes public law 480 and the idea was that uh you could you could buy books we sold excess wheat to countries uh excess agricultural commodities and in return we got blocked currencies and these currencies can only be used
for purchase, you know, various projects.
And the law was amended in 59 to include book purchases.
Book purchases.
Who put that through?
Some very wise congressmen.
Amazing.
I don't credit them with that kind of...
I'm saying that, not you, but I'm amazed.
Some of them are extremely knowledgeable, and people who, you know, I don't think we have that kind of, well, maybe we do.
Yeah, I think, you know, just after the genius time, in the PFOA, the collection of books, and that's the first time actually Tibetan books were made available to our people outside Tibet, and refugees.
That's the first time.
Would you consider yourself an emigre community?
Would you say that there are items here that are no longer in Tibet?
Is it fair to assume that maybe these are the only copies of certain things?
There's many of them.
We've had recently people like Paldor.
He comes from an organization which is in Chengdu, China.
The Tibetans have two great collections of
first the buddhist word which is called the conjurer how spell k-a-n that's about combat style or uh k-a-n-j-u-r say a-n-j-u-r there you are and that is the buddhist word translated into that that's 100 100 108 volumes wow and then you have
the Tangur, which are the commentaries, T-A-N-J-U-R.
These are the commentaries written by Indian scholars on things that are in the conjurer.
These texts are, this amounts to about 230 some odd volumes, depending on the edition.
It depends on the edition.
240?
214.
Depends on .
They were published in a number of places.
There were a number of manuscripts.
Now, because of the things that happened during the Cultural Revolution, in order to do a project of reprinting it in a critical edition, the editors of the—how would you translate—
Comparative, Conjurer, Intangurer project in Critical Edition.
I don't think it's Critical Edition.
But they're producing Comparative Edition.
No, this is Gene.
This is Gene.
Or this gentleman right here.
This is General Poonloper.
Do you have a card?
Well, if you just write it down here.
Anyway, what they're doing is... And your position and also your title and also where I can reach you by telephone if I have any other questions.
I'm sorry, Gene.
Oh, him?
This is the word of the Buddha translated into Tibet.
Now these are books that you printed from the material that was taken out.
Almost everything you see here is the result of reproductions in India of books that were hand-carried out of Tibet.
So when the Cultural Revolution was happening, everyone was carrying their books out and all the books were fleeing into exile.
And everyone had their book.
And when they reassembled in India, Nepal, and the refugee communities, people like Jim came from the Library of Congress and contacted them and said, we want to help reprint up because we have money to do this.
I see.
And managed to reproduce all of these.
Now, these have been reproduced in a traditional fashion.
Right.
This is the conjurer.
Now, let me show you what they're doing in China.
This is the first volume.
It's called the Beijing.
They're doing this.
And they're looking around.
Here, let's get Paldor to show the product of his institution.
Hello.
This is Paldor.
Here's Paldor.
From Sichuan.
He's from Chengdu.
Uh-huh.
And his organization.
This is the first volume of the Tenggur.
Oh, that's beautiful.
That's done in China?
This is done in China.
And it's electronically done.
So they have the variant readings from all of the different editions.
Do we read in the traditional left to right?
Yes.
And this is a beautiful set.
This contains two volumes.
And there will be, of this tinder, there will be about a hundred and some odd volumes in this series.
This is a description of it.
This is being done by the People's Republic?
Yes.
And...
Thank you.
Paldor is, they have the electronic input that they produce.
So that's very important.
And Rinpoche is transferring skills that he's had, he's learned, to people like Paldor in China.
So it's an international cooperation across boundaries.
So when this ingathering started, you're still with L.C.
at that point?
Yes.
I retired from L.C.
a year ago.
What was your title?
I was the field director of first the New Delhi office, then the Jakarta office.
I was nine years in Indonesia, two years in Cairo.
LC is probably the only library in the world, a national library, that actually has field agents, would you say, working abroad.
And was this ostensibly to gather material for LC?
Yes.
Please come and sit down.
Okay.
Wow, that's...
Thanks.
This is so nice.
Where should I sit?
Why don't you sit next to Rinpoche, because what's happening now is because of Rinpoche, and there's also Yeshi Michael Roach, who does a thing called Asian Classics Input Project.
uh i don't know if you've met him well this is my first uh he's really they're soon to uh kim they're releasing the first uh the new guest i think that gloomington yeah the fourth uh edition of the basic desk but this is the way that's important i think for these studies to go tell me a little bit about the group that's gathered today this is uh well it's first i'm
It's really Dzogchen Panlovermuche's friends, and Chimi, Chimi and Umuche and Tashi, are here using the library on their way to the Bloomington Conference.
Oh, and also Karma.
So this is a working library as well?
Yeah.
Used mainly by...
scholars, Tibetan scholars, Western scholars, visitors from Europe, all over America, and graduate students, people who are researching.
Is it fair to say that there are materials here that aren't available at major research libraries?
It's fair to say that certainly part of the problem is that even though
The Library of Congress had an overseas acquisitions program that's participated in by many academic libraries.
The materials are completely uncataloged.
No one knows these books may be fitting.
For example, Cornell has a partial collection that is sitting in a warehouse in an apple orchard because no one can catalog them.
I know about that.
I'm writing about that apple orchard now.
Are you?
Oh, I am.
Because Cornell has basically directed that no more than five million books can ever now be stored on Central Campus.
And that will actually be in this section.
I'm writing about their efforts to recede the Cambodian... Judy Ledgerwood.
I haven't talked to Judy Ledgerwood, but she's there, right?
I don't know where she is now.
John Dean is who I've talked to.
John Dean, and you should talk to John Badgley.
He's now retired, sitting around someplace.
John Badgley, right?
Yeah, he was a curator of the Southeast Asian collection.
Yes, and Mark Dimunation told me about it.
I think we just went to L.C., by the way.
You know, Mark Dimunation, D-I-M-U-N-A-I-T-I-O.
But he just took the rare books job at night.
He had that similar position at the time.
He had some problems.
It's a very risky job to take.
A lot of people wouldn't take it.
Should we take a little bit of this as it comes by?
Probably.
This looks wonderful.
You might like to look at the unique artist site.
I think it's interesting.
Tibet can be displayed on the web.
Really?
Did you put the slide on here?
Yes, it's in the cloud.
Oh, too.
Yeah, it is right there.
There you go.
And we do a lot of text input, like the hard copy.
You do input into electronic.
You know, maybe using like Microsoft Word.
How long have you been in Canada?
I've been traveling on and off for three, four years.
And engaged in this project.
How long are you in?
We're mainly based in New York.
And we've done a lot of work in Kathmandu, Nepal.
Did you come to the shoot at your son?
So far we've done like maybe 80,000 techniques.
That's a lot.
80,000.
Now, are you scanning them in?
How is it working?
Are you keyboarding it in?
We have software programs that will kind of watch.
Just identify yourself with a ticket.
I'm Marty Marred from Natartha International.
software programs written to output in Tibetan, on the screen or print in Tibetan.
So you use standard PCs to input.
Usually you have a keyboard translator that translates the Roman character keystrokes into the Tibetan characters they're equivalent to.
And so you take the original text in Tibetan,
And the inputter will read that and he will input it into his computer for either printing and hard copy or electronic distribution or searching and sorting in electronic format.
How do you choose materials for this hand?
Many of the texts are in demand in our community, Tibetan refugee community.
Like these texts, some of them are out of print.
We can't get any more copies, and some texts are not even printed for public.
So we're trying to collect all the manuscripts and copies of the manuscripts from Tibet.
and in India, that we have a historical record of it.
Is the exile community, or the refugee community, basically in Canada, or is that just where you have the region?
We have different refugees in Canada, in the United States, and the majority of our refugees in India.
Yeah, I was born there.
What's the important thing, I think, though, is that this will eventually transcend national boundaries, and it will be preservation of the Tibetan culture wherever it may be.
In Bhutan, they have Tibetan culture, parts of which are not refugees in China, as well as among what I would call the diaspora.
And there's an increasing number of Westerners who are interested in, scholars and practitioners, who are interested in the study of these Tibetan texts.
So, you know, it's a, it has to be an international project without rancor.
These are, I mean, you know, Tibetan...
Academic tradition is very closely tied to the Indian development.
So this is really 2,500 years of development of these texts.
And it's a commentarial tradition.
So the original commentaries and commentaries are sourced, you know, back to the great Indian philosophical ferments and those periods.
So this is actually still a living tradition while the scholars are available who can read these texts.
And eventually they're not only needed for scholars in those languages, but there's a lot of interest in being translated out of the languages.
And they can, I believe, make valuable contributions to general scholarship.
How important are computers?
Are computers going to be the means to saving these ancient texts?
I think it's very tricky because if you input everything in computer and don't save it properly, you can crash and lose all the data in an instant.
But if you use it properly, I think it's very, very beneficial because there's a search capability in computer.
And also, as Jean pointed out earlier, that you can make it available to people in any form you want, like in a book form or text.
As you saw, the original Tibetan text format, we can do it in any format.
And we're using Quark Express to make the Tibetan format, and we use also book format, too.
So we go to this, I go to this website, and is all this material readily available?
On the site?
Not yet.
It's a toy right now.
Right now it's a toy.
So when did you start then?
This is just being started now?
Is that what it is?
The website?
Yeah, the website.
The project started in 1992, 1993.
But, you know, we're all based on volunteer basis we're working on right now.
And so, you know, it's not, we can't produce as fast as we want.
There's also technical limitations on putting Tibetan on the web.
So it's actually the technology that makes it possible.
It hasn't even been around for more than a couple of years.
Do you mean the Tibetan characters?
To display Tibetan on the web, because typically computers have been written in... Asking tool or whatever.
Right, asking.
So to actually be able to display and so on has only been possible recently with graphic-based and Windows-based.
systems, that operating systems have been accessible with new breakthroughs and hybrid technology on the web, and there's still a lot of growing pains for this sort of display.
Tell me, just again, what your involvement is with the project?
I'm the vice president.
I work with WIMSH and general counsel, and I'm a troubleshooter, but I mainly try and be an interface between
And the scholars, Tibetan scholarly side, and the technical people, we employ technical people and scholars to try and support the scholarship with technology.
You're in Canada as well?
I'm in New York.
You're in New York.
You should tell something about the volunteer.
I think Marty's a lawyer by trade.
I'm pretty much.
Right, I'm working full-time now, but I try it.
I spent about a year and a half off to work entirely on the tartha matters with Rinpoche now.
I take a month off here and there to work on that, but it's mainly volunteer support.
And if you look at the whole development of Tibetan technology or technology that supports Tibetan language projects, it's been mostly created by volunteers doing it in their spare time, hackers.
just hacking for Tibetan solutions in their spare time.
So we don't have a lot of commercial interest behind this.
You know, it's all altruistic.
So gradually people are trying to develop standards so that they can make this into something universal.
But right now it's sort of little people developing it on their own time.
So if there's no commercial application, how is it supported?
Well, there's no commercial application to create standards, but people can use commercial applications.
add in Tibetan rules like we use Microsoft Word for instance and then you have to create a font that displays Tibetan and then you have to create it so it works in Word and you have to create a way to input the Tibetan characters from the actual ancient text itself into the word processing system and then you have to have a way for the
computer to store that data and access that data even though it's not in ASCII or a romantic character and has a lot of weird things in it.
So this is a whole technological ferment.
I mean, the PC, you know, historically PCs are only 10 years old.
So the PCs that are able to handle foreign languages are much younger even.
And because the Asian market is growing, there's a greater capability of handling Asian characters.
So that
although it's not directly Tibetan, that language development does help in the development of Tibetan because you can piggyback on some of the things being done in Chinese, Japanese, which has a much greater commercial value.
But there's still a lot of technical issues that haven't even been addressed yet.
Sorry, Paul.
For example, the fact that
Because a lot of this is going on at the volunteer level, there are many different systems that have been devised which are nominally compatible.
You need to have conversion facilities from one to another.
There's the whole question of the long-term viability and preservation that's going on if you follow electronic archives for the U.S.
government.
electronic files from all of the NASA missions from the censuses.
They're decaying.
The records aren't even made together.
Right.
So, for example, the question is, I mean, these things, and we're talking 30, 20, 30, 40 years old, and this data, all the effort and money behind it, is completely inaccessible.
You can't even read the tapes, or they snap.
So there's...
There's whole issues that need to be taken into account now, and this is one of the things that we're attempting to address, people are attempting to address, for example, with books that are being typeset, you know, what's happening to these files?
Is there any efforts being made to preserve them, to, you know, just to make them available?
And then in terms of just every individual organization, I mean, everyone maintains their backups and block one hoax.
So the question of how these systems will interface in the long term and who's in charge of making sure that these files continue to exist, it sort of adds an additional level of ephemerality to the material that is ephemeral to begin with.
Gene, is this an organization that you established when you left LCA?
No, no, it's the project of the Trace Foundation.
Okay.
And maybe you should tell them a little bit about what this is.
And Kim, why don't you say something about this?
Yes, my name is Kim Morris, and I work with the Trace Foundation.
If you could just spell your last name.
M-O-R-R-I-S, like the cat.
The foundation was established in 1993 by a young woman who decided to use funds that her father had invested for her as a child for this project, for Trace overall.
She did projects in a number of other areas, but what interested her initially in Tibetan people and their culture was that she taught English in a school
near a place called Cha Cha in Qinghai Province near Lake Kokonor.
Do you want to give me her name?
Her name is Andrea Soros.
How do you spell it?
Thank you.
I know the name.
She also taught English in a monastery in northern India and became pretty interested in the level of wealth of this culture and what it had to offer.
So after another trip,
into Tibetan areas in China, she decided that she would try to focus at least some of this funding on Tibetan communities there.
And for the past two, three years, we've been primarily focusing on small development projects, rural development, such as schools, healthcare, teacher training, these sorts of things.
And one of the things that
we've been really pleased with is this idea of high art, Himalayan Inner Asia Resources, and that it could be used to bring people together at a time when there is a real resurgence of Tibetan literature, things being published, both modern works and also classical works.
And there's frankly no better scholar to really work on the conception of this idea and bring it into being than Gene Smith.
So he's really been helpful.
for the last 18 months working with us on these ideas.
So as you can see, people are here using the materials.
It's a working place.
And I think the thing that's of interest now is this idea of electronic libraries.
This seems to be the place where people are going.
And we can email our field staff in Tibet.
I got an email the other day that they were watching World Cup soccer on the border of Nepal.
And I couldn't do that two years ago if I sent people out into the field.
I wouldn't hear for them for four or five weeks that are shot.
So the computer is really changing the nature of Asia and its access to the West.
And this is a really wonderful time for books that were brought into exile and have been spread throughout the world and the diaspora to be returned to people living in the borders of China.
and also books that were reclaimed in China to be made accessible to people who live outside.
And you're working on that, too?
Well, we're beginning to explore it.
That's what some of these meetings are about, and finding the people who are already working on these ideas, people who spent years like Xochitl Penelope's project and Michael Roach's project, ACIP, and lots of other people have this in mind.
And what's really important is some of the aged lamas and teachers in these traditions
They're growing quite old, and it's very important that some of this literature become available because the transmission of the religious tradition is done orally and by the written word, and they need the book.
So is TRACE more or less the umbrella organization?
We're the umbrella for the project.
And maybe are there other projects that you're working on besides this, or is this a new project?
This is one of the projects that we're working on.
We think it's a very important one.
It's still in formation.
But we're very interested in improving the level of education.
I mean, that could give you some more ideas of the projects that we're doing.
I'd like to maybe pursue this later at another time.
Sure.
You can drop me a line by email.
Kim Morris.
I love email.
At IBM.net.
IBM.net.
Tim Morris, one word.
N-E-T.
I think we should reiterate the necessity of getting the texts with the people who can transmit them, because, you know, Tibetan literature is dead if there's no transmission, and that explains the urgency.
The lamas who
who know about the text are rapidly disappearing through old age.
And that's why it's so important that people like Dzogchen Rinpoche and Dzogchen Penlope and Chime, you know, they've been active in this and they understand the Western tradition.
Chime for many years was at the British Library.
And now there's a new sort of resurgence.
in understanding that these teachings or these texts are not just dead texts, but they're living entities that have to have the transmission.
So now what's happening is people are coming from Tibet, old lamas who know about the transmission, and giving the, what are called the lungs, or the L-U-N-G.
Did you define that for me?
Well, it's the reading of a text in somebody's presence.
And then you've got trees.
uh trees which are the explanation of the words and the uh substance of the text and finally the wands are the conferring of the initiations to practice a particular uh teaching and if you don't have these you know the the tradition it will die so you know it's broader than just books so what i'm missing here that
This is not something that is accessible merely by reading.
No.
This is what the worst thing in any time is a word of loss.
You have the wrong word.
But what happens is if you find it to better take some fantastic thing, so you can do this, you can produce this with a baby or fruit or something like that, but you don't have the mango, and that's fortune.
It's gone.
And even if there's a mango, it works straight away.
Is there any way that somebody could give me an example?
Maybe this is hard, but what we're talking about?
A very simple example, for example, that the way with Tibetan vocabulary, it's very genre-specific.
So, for example, I've spent many years reading philosophical texts, but if I were to simply pick up a medical text or an astrology text or a text on grammar and linguistics,
I wouldn't be able to read it.
I don't know the vocabulary.
A lot of the vocabulary is contextual.
Many of the terms come from 7th, 8th, 9th century translation of Sanskrit materials, and it would be analogous to sitting down reading a 10th century English book.
You can look at it, and you have dictionaries, but what the inner meaning was, how, and especially with a religious practice text, what it means in terms of application
There's no way to derive that from the text itself.
You need the oral commentary that's been handed down from teacher to student over thousands of years.
So it's a tradition of a mentor and an apprentice?
Is that a fair analogy?
No.
And you need the mentor to... Sometimes even just to read the text, let alone get an understanding of the inner meaning.
Well, to read.
I mean, I'm sure the...
The alphabet doesn't change, but we're talking about reading in different levels of accessibility.
And it's even taught within the tradition.
As Jean pointed out, there's actual teachings of these three acts that are needed in order to read the text at a certain level of access.
You can certainly read the text, you know, while you understand it.
And, you know, certain parts of the tradition are supposedly transmitted entirely just by reading.
But other texts and other parts of the tradition can only be
understood fully with the commentary, with the explanation, and with the initiation.
So it's different.
It's hierarchical.
It's leveraged.
Was it formal?
Was it a formal process of a student and a teacher, or is it religious?
Is it secular and religious, or is it... Well, for example, you take one of the commonest texts, maybe,
uh the madhyamika avatar the basic teaching of the madhyamaka you can you know you can read it the middle way you can read it by yourself you can do the commentary but a good tibetan teacher will say well before i'm going to teach you what the meaning is i'm going to read the thing in your presence just as my teacher has read it in my presence and his teacher before him has received it and so you you sit there
while the teacher reads it to you.
Now, this may sound strange, but this is what's called the lung.
And then, only after he's given you the lung will he give you a tree on each word, or on the meaning, or something like that.
That's an explanation.
It's a different system of scholasticism.
Maybe to us it may not seem very efficient, but for their system, I think it's quite efficient in a context, in the total context.
You know, truth is only true within a context.
So is this tradition in danger?
Yes, because the looms, the people who have the looms, are dying.
They're not being replaced?
Yeah, but see, they're not passing them on because they don't have access to the book and the teacher.
So you have to have a combination of the book?
Assume that I'm totally ignorant of politics and world events.
Well, I hope that you would never get a loom to Machiavelli.
Explain for me why this is happening, why after so many hundreds of years...
because of of the disasters that have happened to the the book the literary tradition and the people who have the access literature have become separated the books have have been destroyed a copy may exist in this monastery south of the himalayas the person who can pass on the tradition is north of the himalayas and there's a national boundary uh and so a person has to go around and say i want
to get this particular teaching.
And they may have to search all over to that to find somebody who can give it to them, or to find the book, even though they have somebody on the premises.
So it's a union of the teacher with the book.
And what's happened is the books, like we've got books here that have become separated for hundreds of years from the tradition.
We can read them.
We won't understand them.
But just, it might happen that there might be somebody who can pass on that tradition.
I think there seems to be a tradition.
In Cambridge University, just say for my tape, who's speaking, okay?
Sorry, I have voices off, and it's also mumbling my Englishes.
In Cambridge University, there were students, and he wanted to preserve a thousand cultures, a thousand traditions, a thousand memories.
He went into Hong Kong,
and then he realized that the real person who had the Zoro Transformation is an old Chinese who lived in Cambridge.
He escaped in the early times, and incredible.
Then what happened is he had not only Daoism traditions, also Tibetan traditions.
Daoism.
And also Tibetan traditions.
Tibetan traditions.
And he wore a black dress, he never changed any of his clothes.
His sister said it's so difficult to go into it.
And then, this child, finally, he starts making it from England.
What do you get?
All the thousands of texts in China.
Same like this Tibetan thing now.
What is the Rumbacharya?
What Rinpoche's other people are doing is like this sort of a... So important is commentary.
Think that you have the text that's not enough.
You need to commentary on by that date.
They're called consummation.
So what kind of affirmative steps are you taking to restore this?
Well, I think this is what he's doing.
How will you get these teachers?
How will you be able to get these people?
who are so necessary to explain, to read the text.
I was telling a story to Jim before you came.
We have this specific commentary, the teaching, on Buddhist philosophy and the path of meditation.
There was a person in Bhutan who had the transmission
and who agreed to give us the transmission, but we couldn't find the text at that time.
And so I got the text recently, like that.
You got the text once or how?
I got the text recently, two years ago.
I got the text, and then by the time I got it, and he's already dead, you know, he died, he died with some sickness.
So like that, you know, we are facing a lot of difficulties, and in danger of losing our transmission,
I don't know any other person who has the transmission of this text right now.
I have to search for that.
And what we're trying to do is we're trying to bring the text to the person who can give the transmission as soon as possible.
And so our effort here is to make the text available to the right person.
How are you finding these people?
Even the teachers?
Exactly.
It's the right people.
The people you say, whoever you suggest is the right person.
Signing lot of research people, isn't it?
That kind of people, some violence and everything.
Sometimes it is .
Now, one example I tell you is when the Tibetans come out from Tibet, and Tibetan refugees, they're all concerned about, of course, their welfare.
One thing that Gene Smith is sitting next to you, without him, all this Tibetan cake wouldn't exist in the world at all.
All this publication is that without the Gene Smith, they will not be exist.
So when he was, I met him as a graduate student, I met him, he did nothing, and he went to India, now, whole Tibetan literature,
It's preserved through him, without his effort.
They wouldn't exist.
What he did is he had no money, but he sent all the universities to buy books and other things.
Then he met all the Tibetan lamas, refugees, asked to bring all the secret texts.
He published a print.
Without him, not one of his books would go on the shelf.
He started from, I think I mentioned 1970, something like that.
He did really tremendous contribution to the preservation of the Tibetan heritage, or culture, whatever you call it.
No other people would do that.
Other people would do it like people who were in the universities, doing one or two book translations.
You could ask any sort of professor that he thought, what good for the Tibetan Buddhism they have.
He thought, how are we going to preserve this one?
Absolutely.
Yeah, but this was all due to my own first teacher who said, we were in the University of Washington.
Rockefeller Foundation at that time gave money to set up nine centers of excellence in Tibetan studies throughout the world.
This was when the Tibetan refugees first came.
And there was a very wise man at the Rockefeller Foundation, Chadwin Gilpatrick, the brother of Roswell, who was our Secretary of Air Force during those years.
Chad set up in 1959.
He went out and he said each center, one in the United States, is Seattle.